I. THE CHARGES AGAINST SOCRATES 

The prosecution charged that Socrates did not recognize the gods of the city, but some new divine beings, and that he corrupted the young men (Apology 24b8-c1). Many believe that these charges by themselves do not state the main reason why Socrates was prosecuted, or the main reason why a majority of the jury voted to convict him. Socrates (according to one view) was prosecuted and convicted because his association with some leading members of the regime of the Thirty had aroused suspicions against him.  

The 'Thirty' were a small group of oligarchs who came to power in Athens after the end of the Peloponnesian War in 404. In this war Athens lost to Sparta, and the Spartan army helped the oligarchs to overthrow the Athenian democracy. After ruling with considerably violence and brutality, the Thirty were deposed (partly by Athenian democrats, and partly by the Spartan army, after the Spartans had a change of heart).  

Socrates was the educator of Critias, one of the Thirty who overthrew the democracy'.

The amnesty of 403. This amnesty, following the restoration of the democracy after the fall of the Thirty, prohibited 'recalling evils' (mnêsikakein) from the past ([Aristotle,] Ath. Pol. 39.6). It is not clear that this prohibition would make it illegal to mention Socrates' relation to members of the Thirty in the years before they actually held power. Still, the amnesty seems to have had a wide scope. For instance, Archinus, a leading defender of the amnesty, denounced someone to the Council for violating the amnesty, and had him summarily executed; and it is not clear that the offender had even brought a formal charge against anyone - he may have just been stirring up controversy (Ath. Pol. 40.2). We should not assume that the jury did not take the amnesty seriously. On the contrary, we may fairly assume that Socrates' accusers would be anxious not to damage their case by even appearing to disregard the amnesty.  We cannot rule out the possibility that the prosecutors and jury were moved primarily by Socrates' association with the Thirty. But we will not need to appeal to it if the explicit charges by themselves adequately explain what happened. Why, then, should we not take these charges seriously?

II.THE RELIGIOUS CHARGES 

Socrates was accused of not recognizing the gods of the city, and of introducing new divinities; and he says the Athenians believed this charge partly because of Aristophanes' Clouds (Ap. 19c). Some find this charge surprising, since the Athenians did not characteristically persecute anyone for unorthodox beliefs; ancient Greek and Roman religion was often a matter of practice and cult rather than belief.  Should we believe Socrates' remark about the Clouds? The fact that it is meant to be funny does not show that it cannot also have been intended as an attack on Socrates.

It is quite unlikely that the audience were meant to emerge, or did emerge, with a favourable impression of Socrates. And if this play had not affected Socrates' reputation, why should Plato represent Socrates as mentioning it at his trial? The two charges in the indictment against Socrates are so similar to the themes of the Clouds that it would have been amazingly foolish of Socrates to take the initiative in reminding the Athenians that the very same charges had been brought against him years ago, before anyone knew how Critias and Alcibiades would turn out. His comments are far more intelligible if other people had remembered the Clouds, and he needs to show that it does not support the charges against him as strongly as it appears to.  

Why did the religious charge and the influence of the Clouds not result in a prosecution of Socrates in the 420s? The delay is not hard to explain. It shows that the Athenians were not moved by religious worries all by themselves irrespective of circumstances. But that is true of many people who are moved by religious worries. It is a familiar fact about the 20th century that many people take religion more seriously under the pressure of war or disaster than they do in other circumstances. Early in the Peloponnesian War the Athenians suffered invasion and the Plague; both the Oedipus Tyrannus and the Clouds were produced in the 420s. The OT does not refer overtly to current events; but it involves a plague, punishment for it, punishment for impiety, and the refutation of scepticism about religion (cf. 898-910, 945-9, 964-83). Later in the 420s, however, Athenian fortunes improved.  

If some Athenians might have regarded the Plague as a sign of divine displeasure, they could hardly have thought the gods were pleased with them at the end of the Peloponnesian War, when they had not only lost their expedition in Sicily, and then lost the war, but had twice lost the democracy as well (in 410 and 404). It is not difficult to suppose that religious anxieties might revive in these circumstances. Whatever tolerance Greek polytheism might extend to theological speculation, a world-view that left the gods with no power of intervention or influence, and made it a waste of time to pray to them or consult their oracles, could hardly be regarded as a way of honouring the gods. It would not be at all surprising if many Athenians regarded the views attributed to Socrates in the Clouds as an insult to the gods.

The trial of Socrates is not the only sign of Athenians anxiety about religious questions in the last years of the Peloponnesian War. The fragments attributed to Critias include a speech from his play the Sisyphus (see Curd, Presocratics Reader, p.107), in which the main character (presumably) explains belief in the gods as the product of human invention designed to restrain secret injustice and lawlessness. According to one ancient source, the author used Sisyphus to express his own atheistic sentiments, not daring to avow them openly for fear of the Areopagus. The remark about the Areopagus is perhaps significant, since it implies that in the last years of the War this Athenian 'House of Lords' took on more than a purely ceremonial role. It seems to have used its prestige to maintain morale in the conduct of the war, and especially in defence of the democracy that was already under internal attack before the defeat of Aigospatamoi. The story about the Sisyphus suggests that in the last years of the War many Athenians were alarmed by open expressions of impiety. 

The fragment also suggests what many Athenians might find alarming about expressions of atheism. It was certainly insulting to the gods to suggest that they did not exist, or that they existed and did not punish impiety. But in so far as the atheist rejected religious sanctions supporting moral principles, he might also be thought to be undermining those moral principles. The Athenians would not have been reassured if Critias had insisted them that he believed in the gods of some of the Presocratics, closely identified with natural forces and altogether without any concern to punish particular acts of injustice. For the subversive part of Sisyphus' speech is the suggestion that the prospect of divine punishment gives no reason to refrain from secret injustice; and at this time in Athenian upper-class circles secret injustice was rather popular. Democrats might well be anxious if one of the traditional restraints on secret injustice was being challenged; they might regard it as an urgent practical matter, not a question of theological speculation. 

Sisyphus' speech might be taken to suggest the view upheld by some characters in the Clouds, that once the fear of divine punishment is removed, there is no reason to refrain from profitable secret injustice; for if there had been some other good reason for an individual to refrain from injustice, why should anyone have bothered to cook up the stories about the gods? It would not be at all surprising if the apparently subversive aspects of the Sisyphus focussed people's attention on Socrates, and on the Clouds. 

 This issue might in fact give an opportunity to misunderstand or pervert Socrates' views. For Socrates and Sisyphus agree that if fear of divine punishment is the only reason for being just, then we have no good reason to be just. Now Socrates' also believes that there are overriding reasons for being just apart from the fear of divine punishment; and it would be quite unfair to focus on his point of agreement with Sisyphus, and to ignore the wide area of disagreement. But such unfairness is not historically improbable. 
 
 It would not be hard to make a case to show that Socrates 'did not recognize the gods recognized by the city', in so far as he rejected traditional views about the relation between morality, piety, and the likes and dislikes of the gods.  It would be wrong, therefore, to discount the religious charge against Socrates, and wrong to discount the significance of Aristophanes. No doubt the political situation plays some role in explaining why Socrates was tried at the particular time he was. But to accept this general assumption is not to say that the religious charge was not serious or did not represent real grounds of hostility to Socrates. 
 
 III. CORRUPTING THE YOUNG MEN 
 
 Socrates was also charged with corrupting the young men (Ap. 24b9). What does this mean? It is not clear what law he was supposed to violate in corrupting young men, or what his prosecutors thought he was doing to corrupt them.  
 
 Socrates suggests that his accusers have no clear idea of what they mean, but are just appealing to stock charges against philosophers; when asked to explain 'corrupting' they mention 'things in the heavens and below the earth', 'not recognizing the gods', and 'making the weaker argument stronger' (Ap. 23d2-7). This partly answers our question about the legal status of the charge; for he suggests that the accusers regard impiety as the primary instance of corruption. When the accusers say 'Socrates does injustice corrupting the youth and not recognizing the gods ...' (24b9-c1), they may mean that he corrupts the youth with his own impiety.  
 
 Another aspect of corrupting the youth is not mentioned in the official charge, but Socrates implies that the accusers have it in mind: making the weaker argument stronger. Socrates dismisses this charge as a stock accusation against philosophers, but he does not actually answer it; and evidently the fact that it could be brought against other people does not show that it was not especially appropriate for Socrates.  
 
 The charge might be levelled against anyone who practised a wide variety of argumentative techniques. A skilled rhetorician would be able to argue on both sides of the case, in the manner of a Euripidean debate; but one could also become skilled in supporting or undermining a position by the use of techniques of examination and objection. Zeno practised these techniques; and so, presumably, did Protagoras. It is a matter for controversy how far Socrates himself contributed to the development of the various techniques called 'eristic', and how far they were already practised by his contemporaries. At any rate, Plato is anxious to distinguish the genuine methods and aims of Socratic cross-examination from the techniques of eristic, and acknowledges that many people found it hard to tell the difference.  
 
 Socrates remarks that some young men learnt techniques of cross-examination from him and then practised them on others (Ap. 23c). In a famous passage of the Republic Plato recognizes this fact about Socratic cross-examination (537e-539c; see Irwin, Classical Philosophy, #152). The significance of this passage is often exaggerated. Plato does not say that Socrates was wrong to do what he did, and he does not imply that he thinks young men in contemporary Athens should not be taught techniques of cross-examination - he is legislating for the ideal state. But the reference to the charges in the Apology is clear; and Plato clearly concedes that practice in argument leads people to despise the moral and political norms and practices they were brought up in (539a).  
 
 This is a fairly common view of what many Athenians objected to in Socrates and in his effect on his companions. If it is right, then it need not be sharply separated from the religious charge; for sophistical, rhetorical, and eristic arguments might readily be used to undermine belief in the gods and belief in divine sanctions for moral principles and practices (the Clouds offers obvious examples). It would be natural to mention Socrates' argumentative techniques (or rather, a malicious or ignorant collection of half-truths about them) to explain how he undermined belief in the gods and in conventional morality.  

This explanation of 'corrupting the young men' does not imply that the Athenians thought Socrates himself was sympathetic to oligarchy, or that they thought he advocated the immoral outlook that (in their view) his methods of argument tended to inspire. Athenians could well believe that he was a bad influence without believing that he was also an apologist of oligarchy.  

The legitimate and serious objections to the use or abuse of Socratic argumentative technique explain quite well by themselves why people might suspect Socrates of corrupting the youth. There is no reason to suppose that the explicit or implicit political content of Socrates' teaching played any role in the accusations against him. The official charges, properly understood, satisfactorily explain why Socrates was prosecuted and condemned. 

